---
title: Pandoc Notes
author: Andrew Turner
date: 2015-11-07
geometry: margin=2cm
fontfamily: libertine
---

# 1. Basics

Use pandoc to convert markdown files into a variety of formats, (e.g. html, pdf,
doc):

    pandoc Input.md -o Output.html

Pandoc is more powerful than this. It can convert to and from many different formats,
with a large range of extra options. These notes cover converting from markdown
to html, pdf, and doc, as well as how to include citations and bibliographies.
Essentially, everything you need to be able to write a paper. 

For more information about writing markdown for pandoc, see:
<http://pandoc.org/demo/example9/pandocs-markdown.html>

For much more complete information, see:

* <http://pandoc.org/README.html>
* <http://pandoc.org/demos.html>

#### Generate html

    pandoc Notes.md -o Notes.html

#### Generate PDFs

    pandoc Notes.md --latex-engine=pdflatex -o Notes.pdf

#### Generate office documents

    pandoc Notes.md -o Notes.{odt,doc,docx}


# 2. Extra options

#### Common pandoc flags

`--standalone` creates a standalone file by adding an appropriate header
and footer from pandoc's built in templates.

`--smart` intelligently interprets quotes, brackets, em dashes etc.

`--toc` adds a table of contents
 
 `--filter pandoc-citproc` processes citations (see below).

`--template` allows you to supply a custom template file.
To view the built in templates:

    pandoc -D $DOCTYPE

Or see: <https://github.com/jgm/pandoc-templates>.

`--reference-docx template.docx`  similarly allows a template to be specified for
office documents.

#### Variables

Further document options can be specified by using the `--variable` or `-V` flag. 
For example:

    pandoc Input.md \
      --variable title="Title of Document" \
      --variable geometry:margin=2cm \
      --latex-engine=pdflatex \
      -o Output.pdf

##### What variables are available to be set?

Any variables used by the document template. For example, pandoc's html
template includes the `$css$` variable, and pandoc's latex template contains
the `$fontfamily$` variable.

For a complete list of what variables are available for each type of document,
see: <http://pandoc.org/README.html#templates>

#### YAML header

Varibles can also be included within a YAML header. For example:

    ---
    title: Title of Document
    author: Andrew
    date: 2015-01-01
    abstract: Abstract goes here
              and continues.
    geometry: margin=2cm
    fontfamily: libertine
    bibliography: ref.bib
    ---

This header can be included in the markdown file itself, or in a separate file.
If placed in a separate file, the final document is generated by:

    pandoc Input.md metadata.yaml -o Output.html


# 3. Citations

If you want to include citations in `Notes.md`, then you can reference a .bib
file.

#### Markdown formatting

In text citations are inserted inside square brackets using the 
`@` symbol followed by the correct identifier from the .bib file.  Multiple 
citations are separated by semicolons and can each be given a prefix, location
and a suffix. To supress the author, simply use `-@`. For instance:

    Early definitions of Evidence-Based Medicine [see, for example: @Sackett_1996]

    Sackett et al [-@Sackett_1996] defined EBM as "the conscientious...
    
    The first appearance of the term Evidence-Based Medicine occurred in an article
    in JAMA by the EBM Working Group [-@EBM_working_group_1992, p. 2420]

#### Generating the references

To generate the references with pandoc the bibliograhy file and the citation
style file can be pre-specified in the document's yaml header. Or alternatively, 
using the following flags in the pandoc command:

    pandoc Notes.md
      --filter pandoc-citeproc \
      --bibliography=/path/to/ref.bib \
      --csl=vancouver.csl \
      -o Notes.html

